# v0.8.0 – Preparing For A More Stable and Flexible Future

This is an exciting release, but it comes with some important breaking changes. Make sure you read these release notes carefully, and let me know if you have questions.

We are breaking things now, so that Hwy can get more stable, faster. If you stick around, it will be worth it.

## NEW FEATURE: Hot Reloading for All Framework-Managed CSS

We now support hot reloading for CSS files in your `styles` folder!

This means that you will now see changes to your CSS files hot update in your browser (without a hard reload) in just milliseconds.

Changes to your JavaScript files will still do a good old-fashioned hard reload, like before.

If you want to shut off hot CSS reloading for some reason, you can do so in your Hwy config by setting `hwyConfig.dev.hotReloadStyles` to `false`.

## BREAKING: Preact Is Now Our Core JSX Rendering Engine

We are moving to Preact for our core JSX renderer, in lieu of Hono's JSX renderer.

While the core Hono server has been absolutely wonderful to build on – and with the utmost respect to the fantastically talented Hono team – I have found Hono's JSX renderer specifically to be a bit too much of a moving target to be a core primitive to build a framework on.

Moving to Preact will alleviate this instability, and it will further open the door to a future where Hwy can officially support client-side Preact (as an alternative to HTMX).

This move to Preact for our core JSX renderer means that any Hono-specific JSX features that aren't directly supported by Preact will also not be supported by Hwy moving forward (namely, async components and streaming suspense). While these experimental Hono JSX features are cool, they are not stable, and at the end of the day, I am much more a believer in the ultimate simplicity and easy-to-reason-about nature of parallel loaders paired with synchronous nested components—i.e., the hugely successful pattern introduced by Remix 1.0.

I strongly considered officially supporting both Preact JSX rendering and Hono JSX rendering, but making the framework JSX-renderer agnostic would add all kinds of complexity that would be harmful to our long-term mission. We need to consolidate on a single, stable, mature solution for our JSX rendering, and that solution is Preact.

My top goal for Hwy is for Hwy itself to become boring and stable as fast as possible. This goal is more aligned with Preact than Hono JSX, and that's OK.

## Migration Instructions

### 1. Preact Dependency

You will need to install Preact into your project:

```bash
npm i preact
```

---

### 2. `jsxImportSource` should now be `preact`

In your `tsconfig.json`, change your `jsxImportSource` to `preact`.

#### ❌ _OLD:_

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "jsxImportSource": "hono/jsx"
  }
}
```

#### ✅ _NEW:_

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "jsxImportSource": "preact"
  }
}
```

---

### 3. Refactor Any Async Components

If you have any async components in your project, refactor them to be synchronous, by moving any necessary asynchronous tasks into the route's associated `loader` function.

Make sure the components no longer use the `async` keyword.

#### ❌ _DON'T DO THIS:_

```tsx
export default async function MyAsyncComponent() {
  const something = await doSomethingAsync();
  return <div>{something}</div>;
}
```

#### ✅ _DO THIS:_

```tsx
export async function loader() {
  return await doSomethingAsync();
}

export default function MySyncComponent({ loaderData }) {
  return <div>{loaderData}</div>;
}
```

---

### 4. Renamed / moved HTMX-specific utilities

#### ❌ _OLD:_

```ts
import { getDefaultBodyProps, redirect } from "hwy";
```

#### ✅ _NEW:_

```ts
import { getDefaultHtmxBodyProps, htmxRedirect } from "@hwy-js/utils/htmx";
```

---

### 5. `defaultHeadBlocks` is now a prop of `renderRoot`

Before, your `HeadElements` component would take a prop called `defaults`.

This has been lifted up to the parent `renderRoot` function, and is now called `defaultHeadBlocks`.

#### ❌ _OLD:_

```tsx
<HeadElements default={defaultHeadBlocks} {...otherProps} />
```

#### ✅ _NEW:_

```tsx
return await renderRoot({
  defaultHeadBlocks,
  ...otherProps,
});
```

---

### 6. `HeadBlock["props"]` is now `HeadBlock["attributes"]`

`HeadBlock["props"]` is now `HeadBlock["attributes"]`.

This lines up better with HTML semantics.

#### ❌ _OLD:_

```ts
{
  tag: "meta",
  props: {
    name: "description",
    content: "Take the Hwy!",
  },
}
```

#### ✅ _NEW:_

```ts
{
  tag: "meta",
  attributes: {
    name: "description",
    content: "Take the Hwy!",
  },
}
```

---

### 7. RouteData

The component you define in the `root` property in the object argument to `renderRoot` now takes a more complex shape and is called, collectively, `RouteData`.

This non-destructured object should be spread into your `HeadElements`, `ClientScripts`, and `RootOutlet` components.

The end result should look something like this:

```tsx
return await renderRoot({
  ...otherProps,
  root: (routeData) => {
    return (
      <html lang="en">
        <head>
          <HeadElements {...routeData} />
          <CssImports />
          <ClientScripts {...routeData} />
          <DevLiveRefreshScript />
        </head>
        <body>
          <RootOutlet {...routeData} />
        </body>
      </html>
    );
  },
});
```

---

### 8. Client Entry Point Changes

There are a couple changes to the client entry point.

First, it will now be named `entry.client.ts` instead of `client.entry.ts`. We'll probably make this configurable in the future, but for now, just swap the words.

#### ❌ _OLD:_

```
Filename: client.entry.ts
```

#### ✅ _NEW:_

```
Filename: entry.client.ts
```

Second, your client entry will now be injected into your document head as a `type="module"` script, instead of being injected as a classic script. We need to make it a proper module to support automatic client code splitting in the future. This has implications for how you import more old-fashioned scripts, like HTMX, Idiomorph, and NProgress, into your project, which is discussed below.

---

### 9. Move "Classic" Scripts Out of Client Entry Point

It's always been a bit of a hack to get HTMX, Idiomorph, and NProgress to play nicely with our client entry point. They really weren't meant to be used that way. Rather, they're designed to just be tossed into your document head as a classic script.

Now, that's exactly what you'll do.

You can now do this via a new property in your `hwyConfig` called `scriptsToInject`. This takes an array of strings, which are paths (relative from your project root) to any distribution-ready scripts you want to inject into your document head. They will be injected as classic scripts (with `defer` on), in the order you specify, in your document head.

#### ❌ _OLD:_

```ts
// client.entry.ts
import { initHtmx, initIdiomorph } from "@hwy-js/client";

await initHtmx();
await initIdiomorph();
```

#### ✅ _NEW:_

```ts
// hwy.config.ts
import type { HwyConfig } from "@hwy-js/build";

export default {
  ...,
  scriptsToInject: [
    "node_modules/htmx.org/dist/htmx.min.js",
    "node_modules/htmx.org/dist/ext/head-support.js",
    "node_modules/idiomorph/dist/idiomorph-ext.min.js",
  ],
} satisfies HwyConfig;
```

Although this looks more complex, it's actually simpler, since we were doing some hacky stuff under the hood before to get these scripts to work with our client entry point.

Note that these don't need to point to `node_modules` (for example, if you are concerned about the export location changing). You can point to any file in your project, as long as it's a distribution-ready JavaScript file.

SIDE NOTE: In case you weren't aware, another way to self-vendor these would be to to just copy them into your `public` folder, and then use `getPublicUrl("some-script.js")` to get the hashed URL to the file, like this: `<script src={getPublicUrl("some-script.js")} />`.

---

### 10. `RootOutlet` is now exported from `@hwy-js/client`

`RootOutlet` is now exported from `@hwy-js/client` instead of `hwy`.

#### ❌ _OLD:_

```tsx
import { RootOutlet } from "hwy";
```

#### ✅ _NEW:_

```tsx
import { RootOutlet } from "@hwy-js/client";
```
