# v0.8.0 – Preparation For A More Flexible Future

## BIG NEWS: Soon, we will support Preact

In the near future, Hwy will support Preact – **_if desired_** – both for server rendering (in lieu of Hono JSX) as well as client rendering / routing (in lieu of HTMX).

### Why?

I've always wanted to support Preact. In fact, the earliest versions of Hwy were built on Preact, not HTMX.

When I discovered HTMX, it allowed me to (1) delete quite a bit of code from Hwy, (2) simplify Hwy's architecture and "punt" on some of the harder problems that come with isomorphic rendering, and (3) ultimately ship Hwy sooner. For those reasons, I decided at the time to make HTMX the core of Hwy.

### Lessons Learned

Since making that decision late this summer, I have:

1. Found ways to smooth out some of the complexities of building isomorphically on top of Preact; and
2. Bumped against some rough edges of both Hono JSX and HTMX that would have been alleviated by a more stable and flexible Preact-driven architecture.

### Preact's JSX Renderer is Very Stable

With the utmost respect for the absolutely incredible Hono team, their approach to the Hono JSX renderer definitely seems to be to "move fast and break things". On the other hand, Preact is extremely boring and stable, and its team is committed to being boring and stable. As a core primitive to build Hwy on top of, I prefer the latter. This is because my goal is to make Hwy itself as boring and stable as possible, as soon as possible. Further, the Fresh framework (in the Deno ecosystem) is building on Preact, and Hwy shares a lot of goals / aesthetic sensibilities with Fresh.

### We'll Always Support HTMX

We'll always support HTMX, because at its core, Hwy just serves a traditional multi-page HTML app. This means all you ever would need to do to use HTMX with Hwy is just to add the HTMX script into your document head. (Indeed, this is how HTMX is actually designed to be used, whereas importing it into a client entry module like we do today is really more of a hack.)

Additionally, we'll continue to export HTMX-specific helper utilities from Hwy like we do today, such as `redirect` and `getDefaultBodyProps` (though their names and locations will change to reflect that they are HTMX-specific – more on that later).

### Two Future Modes: (1) "Classic MPA" and (2) "Isomorphic Preact"

Toward these ends, in the future Hwy will have two modes:

1. `CLASSIC_MPA` (basically what Hwy is today, and into which you can inject HTMX or whatever you want); and
2. `ISOMORPHIC_PREACT`[^1]

### Code Differences Between the Two Modes

The code you write would be identical between the two modes, with the following exceptions:

#### _HOOKS_

In `ISOMORPHIC_PREACT` mode, you can write hooks (_e.g._, `useEffect`) in your page components. In `CLASSIC_MPA` mode, you can't use hooks (well, technically you could if you're (1) using Preact for server-rendering, though it would be pointless, or (2) if you're going a build-your-own-Preact-SPA route, with say Wouter or even React Router or Tanstack Router (see footnote 1[^1])).

#### _PAGE COMPONENTS_

In `ISOMORPHIC_PREACT` mode, all page components code must be (1) synchronous and (2) client-safe (meaning no server-only code), because they will run on both the server and the client. This means that in `ISOMORPHIC_PREACT` mode, server-only code should simply be moved into loaders (which is really a cleaner architecture anyway). In `CLASSIC_MPA` mode, you can continue to write server-only code in your page components, because they will only run on the server.

Additionally, in `CLASSIC_MPA` mode, if you are using Hono JSX, you will continue to be able to write async page components, for as long as everything "just works" with Hono's JSX renderer. However, we will not be going out of our way to support various async component patterns in the future, and we will be recommending using Preact for JSX rendering for all new projects, regardless of whether you are using Preact on the client.

At the end of the day we really believe the parallel loader / synchronous view pattern is on balance the cleanest, most performant, and most easy-to-reason-about way to build component-driven apps, and that's what we want to optimize Hwy for. (Perhaps we can be a home for anyone who, like me, is skeptical of all the complex async component patterns that have emerged in the React ecosystem over the past few years.)

#### _SPLITTING UP CLIENT AND SERVER MODULES_

Similarly, in `ISOMORPHIC_PREACT` mode, you'll be required to split your client and server code into different files. In practice, this will mean putting your exported page components into `<filename>.page.tsx` files, and your other server-only exports (`loader`, `action`, `head`, and `ErrorBoundary`) into `<filename>.server.tsx` files.

Note that this is basically how Remix works with React today, except that Remix lets you mix your server and client code in a single file. If memory serves, I have seen some posts from the Remix team suggesting they regret this, and Hwy is taking a different route (pun intended) if you're in `ISOMORPHIC_PREACT` mode. Now, you may be thinking that this makes it more of a pain to share types, but in practice it's really not bad at all. The files will be siblings and live next to each other in your file tree, and you can just export your `loader` and `action` types from your "dot-server" file and import them into your "dot-page" file to pass as a generic to your `PageProps` type. It's really not bad at all.

But don't worry, in `CLASSIC_MPA` mode, you can still write all your component and server code in a single file if you want. There will simply be a Hwy config option (likely `useDotServerFiles`) which will be required to be `true` in `ISOMORPHIC_PREACT` mode, but which may be either `true` or `false` in `CLASSIC_MPA` mode.

---

Anyway, in service of this future, we have moved some things around to enhance flexibility, compatibility, and ultimately end-user power.

Now onto the breaking changes that will help us achieve these goals...

## BREAKING CHANGES

### HTMX-specific utilities have been renamed and moved:

#### _OLD:_

```ts
import { getDefaultBodyProps, redirect } from "hwy";
```

#### _NEW:_

```ts
import { getDefaultHtmxBodyProps, htmxRedirect } from "@hwy-js/utils/htmx";
```

As we expand beyond just HTMX in the future, this helps us to keep some (1) separation, (2) clarity, and (3) bloat avoidance in core.

### Utilities, Not Components

It's really hard to be JSX-renderer agnostic when you're exporting components. It also really hard to give users full power in a component-driven model, without getting into some very complex nesting and component composition patterns, which honestly I'm not really a fan of.

For that reason, for your head elements, we are moving away from giving you components, and towards giving you the exact data you need to render your head elements however you want.

Instead of describing everything in prose, let's just look at some code.

#### _OLD:_

```tsx
app.all("*", async (c, next) => {
  return await renderRoot({
    c,
    next,
    root: ({ activePathData }) => {
      return (
        <html lang="en">
          <head>
            <meta charset="UTF-8" />
            <meta
              name="viewport"
              content="width=device-width,initial-scale=1"
            />

            <HeadElements
              c={c}
              activePathData={activePathData}
              defaults={[...defaultHeadBlocks]}
            />
            <CssImports />
            <ClientScripts activePathData={activePathData} />
            <DevLiveRefreshScript />
          </head>

          <body>
            <RootOutlet
              c={c}
              activePathData={activePathData}
              fallbackErrorBoundary={() => {
                return <div>Something went wrong.</div>;
              }}
            />
          </body>
        </html>
      );
    },
  });
});
```

There, in the old way, the underlying `renderRoot` function is responsible for server-rendering JSX, and the various head elements are components exported by the framework. This is pretty to look at, and it's nice on day one, but it's not very flexible, and it doesn't give you very much power.

#### _NEW:_

```tsx
app.all("*", async (c, next) => {
  // Here, we give you a util to get all the
  // helpful data you need based on the current page
  const routeData = await getRouteData({
    c,
    defaultHeadBlocks: [...defaultHeadBlocks],
  });

  if (routeData instanceof Response) {
    // If this is a "resource route", or a response to a
    // client routing request, we just return the response
    return routeData;
  }

  if (!routeData) {
    // You'll get here if there are no matches for the
    // current route, in which case we just want to eject
    // back to the core Hono router
    return await next();
  }

  // And finally, here we give you a bunch of helpful
  // building blocks to render your head components, and
  // ultimately your root outlet
  const {
    title,
    criticalInlinedCssProps,
    metaElementsProps,
    injectedScriptsProps,
    clientEntryModuleProps,
    restHeadElementsProps,
    pageSiblingsProps,
    bundledStylesheetProps,
    devRefreshScriptProps,
  } = routeData;

  const markup = (
    <html lang="en">
      <head>
        <meta charset="UTF-8" />
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,initial-scale=1" />

        <title>{title}</title>

        <style {...criticalInlinedCssProps} />

        {metaElementsProps.map((props) => (
          <meta {...props} />
        ))}

        {injectedScriptsProps.map((props) => (
          <script {...props} />
        ))}

        <script {...clientEntryModuleProps} />

        {restHeadElementsProps.map((props) => (
          /* @ts-ignore */
          <props.tag {...props.attributes} />
        ))}

        {pageSiblingsProps.map((props) => (
          <script {...props} />
        ))}

        <link {...bundledStylesheetProps} />

        <script {...devRefreshScriptProps} />
      </head>

      <body>
        <RootOutlet
          // just spread the entire routeData object into your RootOutlet
          {...routeData}
          fallbackErrorBoundary={() => {
            return <div>Something went wrong.</div>;
          }}
        />
      </body>
    </html>
  );

  // Now, you're responsible for server-rendering the markup
  // In the future, we'll recommend using Preact here instead
  return c.html(html`<!doctype html>${markup}`);
});
```

Now this is undeniably more verbose, but it's also undeniably more powerful. You might not have even known that all of those building blocks were inside the prior head elements, and therein lies the problem; they are too abstract.

Further, you can easily put all the ugly bits into your own wrapper component, and tuck them away. But that should be your responsibility, not the framework's!

Note that this approach allows you to use different core JSX renderers, and it also allows you to easily overwrite (or just make explicit) certain props, such as whether certain scripts are modules or classic scripts, for example. Not to mention allowing you to quickly adjust the ordering of your head elements on a super granular basis if desired. Further, it makes it easy for you to `map` and `filter` on the underlying exported head blocks if you want to do that. The sky is the limit.

### Head Block Shape Change

The shape of non-title head blocks has changed. Instead of being `{ tag, props }`, they are now `{ tag, attributes }`. This is just to align better with what they're actually called in HTML. As a reminder, `tag` is something like `link` or `style`, and `attributes` (formerly `props`) is something like `{ rel: "stylesheet", href: "/styles.css" }` or `{ type: "text/css" }`. As an even deeper reminder, "head blocks" are what you export from any nested page to set its associated head elements.

### Head Block Merging

Additionally, note that we are being a little less aggressive with overwriting parent head blocks with nested child head blocks, and are only doing it in cases where we are confident that you're only going to want one of a particular attribute pair. This may mean you need to do some manual de-duplication logic in your head block exports, but that's better than us accidentally overwriting your stuff.

### HTMX, Idiomorph, and NProgress Scripts

Until now, we've been importing HTMX, Idiomorph, and NProgress into your client entry file. This has never worked particularly well, primarily because these scripts are really designed to just be referenced as is in the document head, and there's really no need to run them through the bundler via your client entry file. Further, we want to make your client entry file by default `type="module"`, which doesn't work well with classic scripts designed to just be tossed into your document head from a CDN.

So, we've added a new property to your Hwy config called `scriptsToInject`, and it takes an array of file locations, presumably pointing to somewhere in your `node_modules` folder, which will be injected into the document head as classic scripts. So instead of importing HTMX, Idiomorph, and NProgress in your client entry, you'll now just add references to those pre-compiled scripts in your Hwy config, and they'll just be injected into your document head as classic scripts. If you use your client entry for other things, know that it's a `type="module"` script. If you need to use classic (non-module) scripts, use the new `scriptsToInject` config item.

#### _OLD:_

```ts
// client.entry.ts
import { initHtmx, initIdiomorph, initNProgress } from "@hwy-js/client";

initHtmx().then(initIdiomorph).then(initNProgress);
```

#### _NEW:_

```ts
// hwy.config.ts
import type { HwyConfig } from "@hwy-js/build";

export default {
  ...,
  scriptsToInject: [
    "node_modules/htmx.org/dist/htmx.min.js",
    "node_modules/htmx.org/dist/ext/head-support.js",
    "node_modules/idiomorph/dist/idiomorph-ext.min.js",
    "node_modules/nprogress/nprogress.js",
  ],
} satisfies HwyConfig;
```

Of course, if you aren't using HTMX, Idiomorph, or NProgress, you can just leave them out of your `scriptsToInject` array (which itself is entirely optional).

Note that these are injected via the `injectedScriptsProps` prop which is returned from the new `getRouteData` util, as discussed above.

Also, alternatively, you can easily just self-vendor these scripts by tossing them into your `public` folder and referencing them using `getPublicUrl(filename)`, or by putting them into any arbitrary folder and referencing that folder in `scriptsToInject` instead of `node_modules`. It's really up to you. We just don't recommend putting them in your client entry file anymore, since that will inherently be a `type="module"` script.

### Client Entry File Name Change

We've changed the name of the client entry file from `entry.client.ts` to `client.entry.ts`. This is just to be more consistent with convention. In the future, we may make your entry file names and locations totally customizable, but for now, just flip "entry" and "client" in your file name.

---

[^1]: You could argue that there are really four potential modes, with those modes being (i) "Classic MPA", (ii) "HTMX-Upgraded MPA", (iii) "Isomorphic Preact MPA", and (iv) "Preact SPA" (Bring Your Own Router)... but really both items (ii) "HTMX-Upgraded MPA" and (iv) "Preact SPA" would just be light user-land layers on top of Hwy's actual `CLASSIC_MPA` mode. Whereas `ISOMORPHIC_PREACT` on the other hand actually changes the internal behavior of the framework at a deep level. For that reason, while "HTMX-Upgraded MPA" and "Preact SPA" are totally valid options and ways to build an app with Hwy, they aren't really core modes in the framework. Note however that in this mode (iv) (build-your-own-SPA mode), you'd be able to use whatever router you want, such as Wouter, React Router, Tanstack Router, or your own home-grown router (good luck).
